# Why Freezeyt?

Freezeyt helps you build *static websites*.


## Static sites

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_web_page):

> A **static web page**, sometimes called a **flat page** or a
> **stationary page**, is a web page that is delivered to a web browser
> exactly as stored, in contrast to *dynamic web pages* which are generated
> by a web application.

Compared to dynamic websites:
- Static sites can be hosted on any platform that allows Web hosting.
- There is no data or database that would need backups.
- Static sites are easily archived, for example by the Wayback machine.
- Static sites are usually more secure: they need only need a Web server,
  not processes like Python or a database.

However, static sites also have significant limitations.
In particular, users cannot make any changes to a static site.
Adding comments, publishing posts, even adding “likes” is not possible.

With every change -- for example, adding a blog post -- a static site needs
to be *rebuilt* and re-*uploaded* to a Web server.


## Static first

With Freezeyt, your website *is* generated by an application,
but then stored on disk exactly as it will be delivered to the web browser.

This means that you can write your app in the traditional way, using a Python
framework like [Flask], [Falcon] or [Django], and then *freeze* it to produce
an easy-to-host, read-only version.

This works great in the early phases of a project, when you're setting up
the structure of the app and don't *yet* have users that would want to make
changes. Or you want to focus on other things than enabling comments.

It also works great at the late stages of a project: for example,
after a conference is over, you'll want to keep a read-only archive
of its site as long, and as cheaply, as possible.

We call this approach *static-first*, and think of it as part of a family of
*graceful degradation* principles, where design starts with simpler, lower-tech
solutions, adding extras -- JavaScript, animations, images, CSS styles -- only
when the basics are in place, and making sure that the site works as well as
possible without these extras.

In other words, a *static-first* website has a *read-only* mode, which is
cheap and easy to host but can only be updated by the admin.
It can *also* have dynamic features on top, but if those features are not
available, it degrades gracefully.


[Django]: https://www.djangoproject.com/
[Flask]: https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/
[Falcon]: https://falconframework.org/


## Considerations for static sites

Not every website can be converted (“frozen”) to a set of files that can be
served statically.
There are two main concepts to keep in mind when designing a static site:

### MIME type mapping

When a Web server sends a Web page, it sends *headers* in addition to
the content.
These headers are lost when a site is converted to simple files.
(There are ways to preserve headers in a static site, but that requires custom
server configuration, making the static site less portable than it could be.)

The most important lost header is [Content-Type](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type),
which encodes the type of a page: `text/html` for a Web page, `image/png`
for a picture, `text/css` for a stylesheet.

In a static site, this information is typically stored in *file extensions*:
a Web page is named `index.html`; an image is `smile.png`; a stylesheet
is `body.css`.
When the static server serves the file, it will generate a Content-Type header
based on the extension.

The extension is part of the file name, and thus part of the URL of
the resource.
Authors of static websites must be careful to keep the extension in sync with
the Content-Type.
Otherwise the static server will not guess the type correctly, leading to
broken sites.

Freezeyt is designed to help you keep Content-Type and file extensions in sync,
whether your app is currently not static-only or not.


### URL finding





